BOOK XVIII. Containing The Interval Of Thirty-Two Years.—From The
Banishment Of Archelaus To The Departure From Babylon.






CHAPTER 1. How Cyrenius Was Sent By Cæsar To Make A Taxation Of Syria
And Judea; And How Coponius Was Sent To Be Procurator Of Judea;
Concerning Judas Of Galilee And Concerning The Sects That Were Among The
Jews.

1. Now Cyrenius, a Roman senator, and one who had gone through other
magistracies, and had passed through them till he had been consul, and
one who, on other accounts, was of great dignity, came at this time into
Syria, with a few others, being sent by Cæsar to be a judge of that
nation, and to take an account of their substance. Coponius also, a man
of the equestrian order, was sent together with him, to have the supreme
power over the Jews. Moreover, Cyrenius came himself into Judea, which
was now added to the province of Syria, to take an account of their
substance, and to dispose of Archelaus's money; but the Jews, although
at the beginning they took the report of a taxation heinously, yet did
they leave off any further opposition to it, by the persuasion of
Joazar, who was the son of Beethus, and high priest; so they, being
over-persuaded by Joazar's words, gave an account of their estates,
without any dispute about it. Yet was there one Judas, a Gaulonite, 1 of
a city whose name was Gamala, who, taking with him Sadduc, 2 a Pharisee,
became zealous to draw them to a revolt, who both said that this
taxation was no better than an introduction to slavery, and exhorted the
nation to assert their liberty; as if they could procure them happiness
and security for what they possessed, and an assured enjoyment of a
still greater good, which was that of the honor and glory they would
thereby acquire for magnanimity. They also said that God would not
otherwise be assisting to them, than upon their joining with one another
in such councils as might be successful, and for their own advantage;
and this especially, if they would set about great exploits, and not
grow weary in executing the same; so men received what they said with
pleasure, and this bold attempt proceeded to a great height. All sorts
of misfortunes also sprang from these men, and the nation was infected
with this doctrine to an incredible degree; one violent war came upon us
after another, and we lost our friends which used to alleviate our
pains; there were also very great robberies and murder of our principal
men. This was done in pretense indeed for the public welfare, but in
reality for the hopes of gain to themselves; whence arose seditions, and
from them murders of men, which sometimes fell on those of their own
people, [by the madness of these men towards one another, while their
desire was that none of the adverse party might be left,] and sometimes
on their enemies; a famine also coming upon us, reduced us to the last
degree of despair, as did also the taking and demolishing of cities;
nay, the sedition at last increased so high, that the very temple of God
was burnt down by their enemies' fire. Such were the consequences of
this, that the customs of our fathers were altered, and such a change
was made, as added a mighty weight toward bringing all to destruction,
which these men occasioned by their thus conspiring together; for Judas
and Sadduc, who excited a fourth philosophic sect among us, and had a
great many followers therein, filled our civil government with tumults
at present, and laid the foundations of our future miseries, by this
system of philosophy, which we were before unacquainted withal,
concerning which I will discourse a little, and this the rather because
the infection which spread thence among the younger sort, who were
zealous for it, brought the public to destruction.

2. The Jews had for a great while had three sects of philosophy peculiar
to themselves; the sect of the Essens, and the sect of the Sadducees,
and the third sort of opinions was that of those called Pharisees; of
which sects, although I have already spoken in the second book of the
Jewish War, yet will I a little touch upon them now.

3. Now, for the Pharisees, they live meanly, and despise delicacies in
diet; and they follow the conduct of reason; and what that prescribes to
them as good for them they do; and they think they ought earnestly to
strive to observe reason's dictates for practice. They also pay a
respect to such as are in years; nor are they so bold as to contradict
them in any thing which they have introduced; and when they determine
that all things are done by fate, they do not take away the freedom from
men of acting as they think fit; since their notion is, that it hath
pleased God to make a temperament, whereby what he wills is done, but so
that the will of man can act virtuously or viciously. They also believe
that souls have an immortal rigor in them, and that under the earth
there will be rewards or punishments, according as they have lived
virtuously or viciously in this life; and the latter are to be detained
in an everlasting prison, but that the former shall have power to revive
and live again; on account of which doctrines they are able greatly to
persuade the body of the people; and whatsoever they do about Divine
worship, prayers, and sacrifices, they perform them according to their
direction; insomuch that the cities give great attestations to them on
account of their entire virtuous conduct, both in the actions of their
lives and their discourses also.

4. But the doctrine of the Sadducees is this: That souls die with the
bodies; nor do they regard the observation of any thing besides what the
law enjoins them; for they think it an instance of virtue to dispute
with those teachers of philosophy whom they frequent: but this doctrine
is received but by a few, yet by those still of the greatest dignity.
But they are able to do almost nothing of themselves; for when they
become magistrates, as they are unwillingly and by force sometimes
obliged to be, they addict themselves to the notions of the Pharisees,
because the multitude would not otherwise bear them.

5. The doctrine of the Essens is this: That all things are best ascribed
to God. They teach the immortality of souls, and esteem that the rewards
of righteousness are to be earnestly striven for; and when they send
what they have dedicated to God into the temple, they do not offer
sacrifices 3 because they have more pure lustrations of their own; on
which account they are excluded from the common court of the temple, but
offer their sacrifices themselves; yet is their course of life better
than that of other men; and they entirely addict themselves to
husbandry. It also deserves our admiration, how much they exceed all
other men that addict themselves to virtue, and this in righteousness;
and indeed to such a degree, that as it hath never appeared among any
other men, neither Greeks nor barbarians, no, not for a little time, so
hath it endured a long while among them. This is demonstrated by that
institution of theirs, which will not suffer any thing to hinder them
from having all things in common; so that a rich man enjoys no more of
his own wealth than he who hath nothing at all. There are about four
thousand men that live in this way, and neither marry wives, nor are
desirous to keep servants; as thinking the latter tempts men to be
unjust, and the former gives the handle to domestic quarrels; but as
they live by themselves, they minister one to another. They also appoint
certain stewards to receive the incomes of their revenues, and of the
fruits of the ground; such as are good men and priests, who are to get
their corn and their food ready for them. They none of them differ from
others of the Essens in their way of living, but do the most resemble
those Dacae who are called Polistae 4 [dwellers in cities].

6. But of the fourth sect of Jewish philosophy, Judas the Galilean was
the author. These men agree in all other things with the Pharisaic
notions; but they have an inviolable attachment to liberty, and say that
God is to be their only Ruler and Lord. They also do not value dying any
kinds of death, nor indeed do they heed the deaths of their relations
and friends, nor can any such fear make them call any man lord. And
since this immovable resolution of theirs is well known to a great many,
I shall speak no further about that matter; nor am I afraid that any
thing I have said of them should be disbelieved, but rather fear, that
what I have said is beneath the resolution they show when they undergo
pain. And it was in Gessius Florus's time that the nation began to grow
mad with this distemper, who was our procurator, and who occasioned the
Jews to go wild with it by the abuse of his authority, and to make them
revolt from the Romans. And these are the sects of Jewish philosophy.






CHAPTER 2. How Herod And Philip Built Several Cities In Honor Of Cæsar.
Concerning The Succession Of Priests And Procurators; As Also What
Befell Phraates And The Parthians.

1. When Cyrenius had now disposed of Archelaus's money, and when the
taxings were come to a conclusion, which were made in the thirty-seventh
year of Cæsar's victory over Antony at Actium, he deprived Joazar of the
high priesthood, which dignity had been conferred on him by the
multitude, and he appointed Ananus, the son of Seth, to be high priest;
while Herod and Philip had each of them received their own tetrarchy,
and settled the affairs thereof. Herod also built a wall about
Sepphoris, [which is the security of all Galilee,] and made it the
metropolis of the country. He also built a wall round Betharamphtha,
which was itself a city also, and called it Julias, from the name of the
emperor's wife. When Philip also had built Paneas, a city at the
fountains of Jordan, he named it Cæsarea. He also advanced the village
Bethsaida, situate at the lake of Gennesareth, unto the dignity of a
city, both by the number of inhabitants it contained, and its other
grandeur, and called it by the name of Julias, the same name with
Cæsar's daughter.

2. As Coponius, who we told you was sent along with Cyrenius, was
exercising his office of procurator, and governing Judea, the following
accidents happened. As the Jews were celebrating the feast of unleavened
bread, which we call the Passover, it was customary for the priests to
open the temple-gates just after midnight. When, therefore, those gates
were first opened, some of the Samaritans came privately into Jerusalem,
and threw about dead men's bodies, in the cloisters; on which account
the Jews afterward excluded them out of the temple, which they had not
used to do at such festivals; and on other accounts also they watched
the temple more carefully than they had formerly done. A little after
which accident Coponius returned to Rome, and Marcus Ambivius came to be
his successor in that government; under whom Salome, the sister of king
Herod, died, and left to Julia, [Cæsar's wife,] Jamnia, all its
toparchy, and Phasaelis in the plain, and Arehelais, where is a great
plantation of palm trees, and their fruit is excellent in its kind.
After him came Annius Rufus, under whom died Cæsar, the second emperor
of the Romans, the duration of whose reign was fifty-seven years,
besides six months and two days [of which time Antonius ruled together
with him fourteen years; but the duration of his life was seventy-seven
years]; upon whose death Tiberius Nero, his wife Julia's son, succeeded.
He was now the third emperor; and he sent Valerius Gratus to be
procurator of Judea, and to succeed Annius Rufus. This man deprived
Ananus of the high priesthood, and appointed Ismael, the son of Phabi,
to be high priest. He also deprived him in a little time, and ordained
Eleazar, the son of Ananus, who had been high priest before, to be high
priest; which office, when he had held for a year, Gratus deprived him
of it, and gave the high priesthood to Simon, the son of Camithus; and
when he had possessed that dignity no longer than a year, Joseph
Caiaphas was made his successor. When Gratus had done those things, he
went back to Rome, after he had tarried in Judea eleven years, when
Pontius Pilate came as his successor.

3. And now Herod the tetrarch, who was in great favor with Tiberius,
built a city of the same name with him, and called it Tiberias. He built
it in the best part of Galilee, at the lake of Gennesareth. There are
warm baths at a little distance from it, in a village named Emmaus.
Strangers came and inhabited this city; a great number of the
inhabitants were Galileans also; and many were necessitated by Herod to
come thither out of the country belonging to him, and were by force
compelled to be its inhabitants; some of them were persons of condition.
He also admitted poor people, such as those that were collected from all
parts, to dwell in it. Nay, some of them were not quite free-men, and
these he was benefactor to, and made them free in great numbers; but
obliged them not to forsake the city, by building them very good houses
at his own expenses, and by giving them land also; for he was sensible,
that to make this place a habitation was to transgress the Jewish
ancient laws, because many sepulchers were to be here taken away, in
order to make room for the city Tiberias 5 whereas our laws pronounce
that such inhabitants are unclean for seven days. 6

4. About this time died Phraates, king of the Parthians, by the
treachery of Phraataces his son, upon the occasion following: When
Phraates had had legitimate sons of his own, he had also an Italian
maid-servant, whose name was Thermusa, who had been formerly sent to him
by Julius Cæsar, among other presents. He first made her his concubine;
but he being a great admirer of her beauty, in process of time having a
son by her, whose name was Phraataces, he made her his legitimate wife,
and had a great respect for her. Now she was able to persuade him to do
any thing that she said, and was earnest in procuring the government of
Parthia for her son; but still she saw that her endeavors would not
succeed, unless she could contrive how to remove Phraates's legitimate
sons [out of the kingdom;] so she persuaded him to send those his sons
as pledges of his fidelity to Rome; and they were sent to Rome
accordingly, because it was not easy for him to contradict her commands.
Now while Phraataces was alone brought up in order to succeed in the
government, he thought it very tedious to expect that government by his
father's donation [as his successor]; he therefore formed a treacherous
design against his father, by his mother's assistance, with whom, as the
report went, he had criminal conversation also. So he was hated for both
these vices, while his subjects esteemed this [wicked] love of his
mother to be no way inferior to his parricide; and he was by them, in a
sedition, expelled out of the country before he grew too great, and
died. But as the best sort of Parthians agreed together that it was
impossible they should be governed without a king, while also it was
their constant practice to choose one of the family of Arsaces, [nor did
their law allow of any others; and they thought this kingdom had been
sufficiently injured already by the marriage with an Italian concubine,
and by her issue,] they sent ambassadors, and called Orodes [to take the
crown]; for the multitude would not otherwise have borne them; and
though he was accused of very great cruelty, and was of an untractable
temper, and prone to wrath, yet still he was one of the family of
Arsaces. However, they made a conspiracy against him, and slew him, and
that, as some say, at a festival, and among their sacrifices; [for it is
the universal custom there to carry their swords with them;] but, as the
more general report is, they slew him when they had drawn him out a
hunting. So they sent ambassadors to Rome, and desired they would send
one of those that were there as pledges to be their king. Accordingly,
Vonones was preferred before the rest, and sent to them [for he seemed
capable of such great fortune, which two of the greatest kingdoms under
the sun now offered him, his own and a foreign one]. However, the
barbarians soon changed their minds, they being naturally of a mutable
disposition, upon the supposal that this man was not worthy to be their
governor; for they could not think of obeying the commands of one that
had been a slave, [for so they called those that had been hostages,] nor
could they bear the ignominy of that name; and this was the more
intolerable, because then the Parthians must have such a king set over
them, not by right of war, but in time of peace. So they presently
invited Artabanus, king of Media, to be their king, he being also of the
race of Arsaces. Artabanus complied with the offer that was made him,
and came to them with an army. So Vonones met him; and at first the
multitude of the Parthians stood on this side, and he put his army in
array; but Artabanus was beaten, and fled to the mountains of Media. Yet
did he a little after gather a great army together, and fought with
Vonones, and beat him; whereupon Vonones fled away on horseback, with a
few of his attendants about him, to Seleucia [upon Tigris]. So when
Artabanus had slain a great number, and this after he had gotten the
victory by reason of the very great dismay the barbarians were in, he
retired to Ctesiphon with a great number of his people; and so he now
reigned over the Parthians. But Vonones fled away to Armenia; and as
soon as he came thither, he had an inclination to have the government of
the country given him, and sent ambassadors to Rome [for that purpose].
But because Tiberius refused it him, and because he wanted courage, and
because the Parthian king threatened him, and sent ambassadors to him to
denounce war against him if he proceeded, and because he had no way to
take to regain any other kingdom, [for the people of authority among the
Armenians about Niphates joined themselves to Artabanus,] he delivered
up himself to Silanus, the president of Syria, who, out of regard to his
education at Rome, kept him in Syria, while Artabanus gave Armenia to
Orodes, one of his own sons.

5. At this time died Antiochus, the king of Commagene; whereupon the
multitude contended with the nobility, and both sent ambassadors to
[Rome]; for the men of power were desirous that their form of government
might be changed into that of a [Roman] province; as were the multitude
desirous to be under kings, as their fathers had been. So the senate
made a decree that Germanicus should be sent to settle the affairs of
the East, fortune hereby taking a proper opportunity for depriving him
of his life; for when he had been in the East, and settled all affairs
there, his life was taken away by the poison which Piso gave him, as
hath been related elsewhere. 7






CHAPTER 3. Sedition Of The Jews Against Pontius Pilate. Concerning
Christ, And What Befell Paulina And The Jews At Rome.

1. But now Pilate, the procurator of Judea, removed the army from
Cæsarea to Jerusalem, to take their winter quarters there, in order to
abolish the Jewish laws. So he introduced Cæsar's effigies, which were
upon the ensigns, and brought them into the city; whereas our law
forbids us the very making of images; on which account the former
procurators were wont to make their entry into the city with such
ensigns as had not those ornaments. Pilate was the first who brought
those images to Jerusalem, and set them up there; which was done without
the knowledge of the people, because it was done in the night time; but
as soon as they knew it, they came in multitudes to Cæsarea, and
interceded with Pilate many days that he would remove the images; and
when he would not grant their requests, because it would tend to the
injury of Cæsar, while yet they persevered in their request, on the
sixth day he ordered his soldiers to have their weapons privately, while
he came and sat upon his judgment-seat, which seat was so prepared in
the open place of the city, that it concealed the army that lay ready to
oppress them; and when the Jews petitioned him again, he gave a signal
to the soldiers to encompass them routed, and threatened that their
punishment should be no less than immediate death, unless they would
leave off disturbing him, and go their ways home. But they threw
themselves upon the ground, and laid their necks bare, and said they
would take their death very willingly, rather than the wisdom of their
laws should be transgressed; upon which Pilate was deeply affected with
their firm resolution to keep their laws inviolable, and presently
commanded the images to be carried back from Jerusalem to Cæsarea.

2. But Pilate undertook to bring a current of water to Jerusalem, and
did it with the sacred money, and derived the origin of the stream from
the distance of two hundred furlongs. However, the Jews 8 were not
pleased with what had been done about this water; and many ten thousands
of the people got together, and made a clamor against him, and insisted
that he should leave off that design. Some of them also used reproaches,
and abused the man, as crowds of such people usually do. So he habited a
great number of his soldiers in their habit, who carried daggers under
their garments, and sent them to a place where they might surround them.
So he bid the Jews himself go away; but they boldly casting reproaches
upon him, he gave the soldiers that signal which had been beforehand
agreed on; who laid upon them much greater blows than Pilate had
commanded them, and equally punished those that were tumultuous, and
those that were not; nor did they spare them in the least: and since the
people were unarmed, and were caught by men prepared for what they were
about, there were a great number of them slain by this means, and others
of them ran away wounded. And thus an end was put to this sedition.

3. Now there was about this time Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to
call him a man; for he was a doer of wonderful works, a teacher of such
men as receive the truth with pleasure. He drew over to him both many of
the Jews and many of the Gentiles. He was [the] Christ. And when Pilate,
at the suggestion of the principal men amongst us, had condemned him to
the cross, 9 those that loved him at the first did not forsake him; for
he appeared to them alive again the third day; 10 as the divine prophets
had foretold these and ten thousand other wonderful things concerning
him. And the tribe of Christians, so named from him, are not extinct at
this day.

4. About the same time also another sad calamity put the Jews into
disorder, and certain shameful practices happened about the temple of
Isis that was at Rome. I will now first take notice of the wicked
attempt about the temple of Isis, and will then give an account of the
Jewish affairs. There was at Rome a woman whose name was Paulina; one
who, on account of the dignity of her ancestors, and by the regular
conduct of a virtuous life, had a great reputation: she was also very
rich; and although she was of a beautiful countenance, and in that
flower of her age wherein women are the most gay, yet did she lead a
life of great modesty. She was married to Saturninus, one that was every
way answerable to her in an excellent character. Decius Mundus fell in
love with this woman, who was a man very high in the equestrian order;
and as she was of too great dignity to be caught by presents, and had
already rejected them, though they had been sent in great abundance, he
was still more inflamed with love to her, insomuch that he promised to
give her two hundred thousand Attic drachmae for one night's lodging;
and when this would not prevail upon her, and he was not able to bear
this misfortune in his amours, he thought it the best way to famish
himself to death for want of food, on account of Paulina's sad refusal;
and he determined with himself to die after such a manner, and he went
on with his purpose accordingly. Now Mundus had a freed-woman, who had
been made free by his father, whose name was Ide, one skillful in all
sorts of mischief. This woman was very much grieved at the young man's
resolution to kill himself, [for he did not conceal his intentions to
destroy himself from others,] and came to him, and encouraged him by her
discourse, and made him to hope, by some promises she gave him, that he
might obtain a night's lodging with Paulina; and when he joyfully
hearkened to her entreaty, she said she wanted no more than fifty
thousand drachmae for the entrapping of the woman. So when she had
encouraged the young man, and gotten as much money as she required, she
did not take the same methods as had been taken before, because she
perceived that the woman was by no means to be tempted by money; but as
she knew that she was very much given to the worship of the goddess
Isis, she devised the following stratagem: She went to some of Isis's
priests, and upon the strongest assurances [of concealment], she
persuaded them by words, but chiefly by the offer of money, of twenty-
five thousand drachmae in hand, and as much more when the thing had
taken effect; and told them the passion of the young man, and persuaded
them to use all means possible to beguile the woman. So they were drawn
in to promise so to do, by that large sum of gold they were to have.
Accordingly, the oldest of them went immediately to Paulina; and upon
his admittance, he desired to speak with her by herself. When that was
granted him, he told her that he was sent by the god Anubis, who was
fallen in love with her, and enjoined her to come to him. Upon this she
took the message very kindly, and valued herself greatly upon this
condescension of Anubis, and told her husband that she had a message
sent her, and was to sup and lie with Anubis; so he agreed to her
acceptance of the offer, as fully satisfied with the chastity of his
wife. Accordingly, she went to the temple, and after she had supped
there, and it was the hour to go to sleep, the priest shut the doors of
the temple, when, in the holy part of it, the lights were also put out.
Then did Mundus leap out, [for he was hidden therein,] and did not fail
of enjoying her, who was at his service all the night long, as supposing
he was the god; and when he was gone away, which was before those
priests who knew nothing of this stratagem were stirring, Paulina came
early to her husband, and told him how the god Anubis had appeared to
her. Among her friends, also, she declared how great a value she put
upon this favor, who partly disbelieved the thing, when they reflected
on its nature, and partly were amazed at it, as having no pretense for
not believing it, when they considered the modesty and the dignity of
the person. But now, on the third day after what had been done, Mundus
met Paulina, and said, "Nay, Paulina, thou hast saved me two hundred
thousand drachmae, which sum thou mightest have added to thy own family;
yet hast thou not failed to be at my service in the manner I invited
thee. As for the reproaches thou hast laid upon Mundus, I value not the
business of names; but I rejoice in the pleasure I reaped by what I did,
while I took to myself the name of Anubis." When he had said this, he
went his way. But now she began to come to the sense of the grossness of
what she had done, and rent her garments, and told her husband of the
horrid nature of this wicked contrivance, and prayed him not to neglect
to assist her in this case. So he discovered the fact to the emperor;
whereupon Tiberius inquired into the matter thoroughly by examining the
priests about it, and ordered them to be crucified, as well as Ide, who
was the occasion of their perdition, and who had contrived the whole
matter, which was so injurious to the woman. He also demolished the
temple of Isis, and gave order that her statue should be thrown into the
river Tiber; while he only banished Mundus, but did no more to him,
because he supposed that what crime he had committed was done out of the
passion of love. And these were the circumstances which concerned the
temple of Isis, and the injuries occasioned by her priests. I now return
to the relation of what happened about this time to the Jews at Rome, as
I formerly told you I would.

5. There was a man who was a Jew, but had been driven away from his own
country by an accusation laid against him for transgressing their laws,
and by the fear he was under of punishment for the same; but in all
respects a wicked man. He, then living at Rome, professed to instruct
men in the wisdom of the laws of Moses. He procured also three other
men, entirely of the same character with himself, to be his partners.
These men persuaded Fulvia, a woman of great dignity, and one that had
embraced the Jewish religion, to send purple and gold to the temple at
Jerusalem; and when they had gotten them, they employed them for their
own uses, and spent the money themselves, on which account it was that
they at first required it of her. Whereupon Tiberius, who had been
informed of the thing by Saturninus, the husband of Fulvia, who desired
inquiry might be made about it, ordered all the Jews to be banished out
of Rome; at which time the consuls listed four thousand men out of them,
and sent them to the island Sardinia; but punished a greater number of
them, who were unwilling to become soldiers, on account of keeping the
laws of their forefathers. 11 Thus were these Jews banished out of the
city by the wickedness of four men.






CHAPTER 4. How The Samaritans Made A Tumult And Pilate Destroyed Many Of
Them; How Pilate Was Accused And What Things Were Done By Vitellius
Relating To The Jews And The Parthians.

1. But the nation of the Samaritans did not escape without tumults. The
man who excited them to it was one who thought lying a thing of little
consequence, and who contrived every thing so that the multitude might
be pleased; so he bid them to get together upon Mount Gerizzim, which is
by them looked upon as the most holy of all mountains, and assured them,
that when they were come thither, he would show them those sacred
vessels which were laid under that place, because Moses put them there
12 So they came thither armed, and thought the discourse of the man
probable; and as they abode at a certain village, which was called
Tirathaba, they got the rest together to them, and desired to go up the
mountain in a great multitude together; but Pilate prevented their going
up, by seizing upon the roads with a great band of horsemen and foot-
men, who fell upon those that were gotten together in the village; and
when it came to an action, some of them they slew, and others of them
they put to flight, and took a great many alive, the principal of which,
and also the most potent of those that fled away, Pilate ordered to be
slain.

2. But when this tumult was appeased, the Samaritan senate sent an
embassy to Vitellius, a man that had been consul, and who was now
president of Syria, and accused Pilate of the murder of those that were
killed; for that they did not go to Tirathaba in order to revolt from
the Romans, but to escape the violence of Pilate. So Vitellius sent
Marcellus, a friend of his, to take care of the affairs of Judea, and
ordered Pilate to go to Rome, to answer before the emperor to the
accusations of the Jews. So Pilate, when he had tarried ten years in
Judea, made haste to Rome, and this in obedience to the orders of
Vitellius, which he durst not contradict; but before he could get to
Rome Tiberius was dead.

3. But Vitellius came into Judea, and went up to Jerusalem; it was at
the time of that festival which is called the Passover. Vitellius was
there magnificently received, and released the inhabitants of Jerusalem
from all the taxes upon the fruits that were bought and sold, and gave
them leave to have the care of the high priest's vestments, with all
their ornaments, and to have them under the custody of the priests in
the temple, which power they used to have formerly, although at this
time they were laid up in the tower of Antonia, the citadel so called,
and that on the occasion following: There was one of the [high] priests,
named Hyrcanus; and as there were many of that name, he was the first of
them; this man built a tower near the temple, and when he had so done,
he generally dwelt in it, and had these vestments with him, because it
was lawful for him alone to put them on, and he had them there reposited
when he went down into the city, and took his ordinary garments; the
same things were continued to be done by his sons, and by their sons
after them. But when Herod came to be king, he rebuilt this tower, which
was very conveniently situated, in a magnificent manner; and because he
was a friend to Antonius, he called it by the name of Antonia. And as he
found these vestments lying there, he retained them in the same place,
as believing, that while he had them in his custody, the people would
make no innovations against him. The like to what Herod did was done by
his son Archelaus, who was made king after him; after whom the Romans,
when they entered on the government, took possession of these vestments
of the high priest, and had them reposited in a stone-chamber, under the
seal of the priests, and of the keepers of the temple, the captain of
the guard lighting a lamp there every day; and seven days before a
festival 13 they were delivered to them by the captain of the guard,
when the high priest having purified them, and made use of them, laid
them up again in the same chamber where they had been laid up before,
and this the very next day after the feast was over. This was the
practice at the three yearly festivals, and on the fast day; but
Vitellius put those garments into our own power, as in the days of our
forefathers, and ordered the captain of the guard not to trouble himself
to inquire where they were laid, or when they were to be used; and this
he did as an act of kindness, to oblige the nation to him. Besides
which, he also deprived Joseph, who was also called Caiaphas, of the
high priesthood, and appointed Jonathan the son of Ananus, the former
high priest, to succeed him. After which, he took his journey back to
Antioch.

4. Moreover, Tiberius sent a letter to Vitellius, and commanded him to
make a league of friendship with Artabanus, the king of Parthia; for
while he was his enemy, he terrified him, because he had taken Armenia
away from him, lest he should proceed further, and told him he should no
otherwise trust him than upon his giving him hostages, and especially
his son Artabanus. Upon Tiberius's writing thus to Vitellius, by the
offer of great presents of money, he persuaded both the king of Iberia
and the king of Albania to make no delay, but to fight against
Artabanus; and although they would not do it themselves, yet did they
give the Scythians a passage through their country, and opened the
Caspian gates to them, and brought them upon Artabanus. So Armenia was
again taken from the Parthians, and the country of Parthia was filled
with war, and the principal of their men were slain, and all things were
in disorder among them: the king's son also himself fell in these wars,
together with many ten thousands of his army. Vitellius had also sent
such great sums of money to Artabanus's father's kinsmen and friends,
that he had almost procured him to be slain by the means of those bribes
which they had taken. And when Artabanus perceived that the plot laid
against him was not to be avoided, because it was laid by the principal
men, and those a great many in number, and that it would certainly take
effect,—when he had estimated the number of those that were truly
faithful to him, as also of those who were already corrupted, but were
deceitful in the kindness they professed to him, and were likely, upon
trial, to go over to his enemies, he made his escape to the upper
provinces, where he afterwards raised a great army out of the Dahae and
Sacre, and fought with his enemies, and retained his principality.

5. When Tiberius had heard of these things, he desired to have a league
of friendship made between him and Artabanus; and when, upon this
invitation, he received the proposal kindly, Artabanus and Vitellius
went to Euphrates, and as a bridge was laid over the river, they each of
them came with their guards about them, and met one another on the midst
of the bridge. And when they had agreed upon the terms of peace Herod,
the tetrarch erected a rich tent on the midst of the passage, and made
them a feast there. Artabanus also, not long afterward, sent his son
Darius as an hostage, with many presents, among which there was a man
seven cubits tall, a Jew he was by birth, and his name was Eleazar, who,
for his tallness, was called a giant. After which Vitellius went to
Antioch, and Artabanus to Babylon; but Herod [the tetrarch] being
desirous to give Cæsar the first information that they had obtained
hostages, sent posts with letters, wherein he had accurately described
all the particulars, and had left nothing for the consular Vitellius to
inform him of. But when Vitellius's letters were sent, and Cæsar had let
him know that he was acquainted with the affairs already, because Herod
had given him an account of them before, Vitellius was very much
troubled at it; and supposing that he had been thereby a greater
sufferer than he really was, he kept up a secret anger upon this
occasion, till he could be revenged on him, which he was after Caius had
taken the government.

6. About this time it was that Philip, Herod's brother, departed this
life, in the twentieth year of the reign of Tiberius, 14 after he had
been tetrarch of Trachonitis and Gaulanitis, and of the nation of the
Bataneans also, thirty-seven years. He had showed himself a person of
moderation and quietness in the conduct of his life and government; he
constantly lived in that country which was subject to him; he used to
make his progress with a few chosen friends; his tribunal also, on which
he sat in judgment, followed him in his progress; and when any one met
him who wanted his assistance, he made no delay, but had his tribunal
set down immediately, wheresoever he happened to be, and sat down upon
it, and heard his complaint: he there ordered the guilty that were
convicted to be punished, and absolved those that had been accused
unjustly. He died at Julias; and when he was carried to that monument
which he had already erected for himself beforehand, he was buried with
great pomp. His principality Tiberius took, [for he left no sons behind
him,] and added it to the province of Syria, but gave order that the
tributes which arose from it should be collected, and laid up in his
tetrachy.






CHAPTER 5. Herod The Tetrarch Makes War With Aretas, The King Of Arabia,
And Is Beaten By Him As Also Concerning The Death Of John The Baptist.
How Vitellius Went Up To Jerusalem; Together With Some Account Of
Agrippa And Of The Posterity Of Herod The Great.

1. About this time Aretas [the king of Arabia Petres] and Herod had a
quarrel on the account following: Herod the tetrarch had, married the
daughter of Aretas, and had lived with her a great while; but when he
was once at Rome, he lodged with Herod, 15 who was his brother indeed,
but not by the same mother; for this Herod was the son of the high
priest Sireoh's daughter. However, he fell in love with Herodias, this
last Herod's wife, who was the daughter of Aristobulus their brother,
and the sister of Agrippa the Great. This man ventured to talk to her
about a marriage between them; which address, when she admitted, an
agreement was made for her to change her habitation, and come to him as
soon as he should return from Rome: one article of this marriage also
was this, that he should divorce Aretas's daughter. So Antipas, when he
had made this agreement, sailed to Rome; but when he had done there the
business he went about, and was returned again, his wife having
discovered the agreement he had made with Herodias, and having learned
it before he had notice of her knowledge of the whole design, she
desired him to send her to Macherus, which is a place in the borders of
the dominions of Aretas and Herod, without informing him of any of her
intentions. Accordingly Herod sent her thither, as thinking his wife had
not perceived any thing; now she had sent a good while before to
Macherus, which was subject to her father and so all things necessary
for her journey were made ready for her by the general of Aretas's army;
and by that means she soon came into Arabia, under the conduct of the
several generals, who carried her from one to another successively; and
she soon came to her father, and told him of Herod's intentions. So
Aretas made this the first occasion of his enmity between him and Herod,
who had also some quarrel with him about their limits at the country of
Gamalitis. So they raised armies on both sides, and prepared for war,
and sent their generals to fight instead of themselves; and when they
had joined battle, all Herod's army was destroyed by the treachery of
some fugitives, who, though they were of the tetrarchy of Philip, joined
with Aretas's army.. So Herod wrote about these affairs to Tiberius, who
being very angry at the attempt made by Aretas, wrote to Vitellius to
make war upon him, and either to take him alive, and bring him to him in
bonds, or to kill him, and send him his head. This was the charge that
Tiberius gave to the president of Syria.

2. Now some of the Jews thought that the destruction of Herod's army
came from God, and that very justly, as a punishment of what he did
against John, that was called the Baptist: for Herod slew him, who was a
good man, and commanded the Jews to exercise virtue, both as to
righteousness towards one another, and piety towards God, and so to come
to baptism; for that the washing [with water] would be acceptable to
him, if they made use of it, not in order to the putting away [or the
remission] of some sins [only], but for the purification of the body;
supposing still that the soul was thoroughly purified beforehand by
righteousness. Now when [many] others came in crowds about him, for they
were very greatly moved [or pleased] by hearing his words, Herod, who
feared lest the great influence John had over the people might put it
into his power and inclination to raise a rebellion, [for they seemed
ready to do any thing he should advise,] thought it best, by putting him
to death, to prevent any mischief he might cause, and not bring himself
into difficulties, by sparing a man who might make him repent of it when
it would be too late. Accordingly he was sent a prisoner, out of Herod's
suspicious temper, to Macherus, the castle I before mentioned, and was
there put to death. Now the Jews had an opinion that the destruction of
this army was sent as a punishment upon Herod, and a mark of God's
displeasure to him.

3. So Vitellius prepared to make war with Aretas, having with him two
legions of armed men; he also took with him all those of light armature,
and of the horsemen which belonged to them, and were drawn out of those
kingdoms which were under the Romans, and made haste for Petra, and came
to Ptolemais. But as he was marching very busily, and leading his army
through Judea, the principal men met him, and desired that he would not
thus march through their land; for that the laws of their country would
not permit them to overlook those images which were brought into it, of
which there were a great many in their ensigns; so he was persuaded by
what they said, and changed that resolution of his which he had before
taken in this matter. Whereupon he ordered the army to march along the
great plain, while he himself, with Herod the tetrarch and his friends,
went up to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice to God, an ancient festival of
the Jews being then just approaching; and when he had been there, and
been honorably entertained by the multitude of the Jews, he made a stay
there for three days, within which time he deprived Jonathan of the high
priesthood, and gave it to his brother Theophilus. But when on the
fourth day letters came to him, which informed him of the death of
Tiberius, he obliged the multitude to take an oath of fidelity to Caius;
he also recalled his army, and made them every one go home, and take
their winter quarters there, since, upon the devolution of the empire
upon Caius, he had not the like authority of making this war which he
had before. It was also reported, that when Aretas heard of the coming
of Vitellius to fight him, he said, upon his consulting the diviners,
that it was impossible that this army of Vitellius's could enter Petra;
for that one of the rulers would die, either he that gave orders for the
war, or he that was marching at the other's desire, in order to be
subservient to his will, or else he against whom this army is prepared.
So Vitellius truly retired to Antioch; but Agrippa, the son of
Aristobulus, went up to Rome, a year before the death of Tiberius, in
order to treat of some affairs with the emperor, if he might be
permitted so to do. I have now a mind to describe Herod and his family,
how it fared with them, partly because it is suitable to this history to
speak of that matter, and partly because this thing is a demonstration
of the interposition of Providence, how a multitude of children is of no
advantage, no more than any other strength that mankind set their hearts
upon, besides those acts of piety which are done towards God; for it
happened, that, within the revolution of a hundred years, the posterity
of Herod, which were a great many in number, were, excepting a few,
utterly destroyed. 16 One may well apply this for the instruction of
mankind, and learn thence how unhappy they were: it will also show us
the history of Agrippa, who, as he was a person most worthy of
admiration, so was he from a private man, beyond all the expectation of
those that knew him, advanced to great power and authority. I have said
something of them formerly, but I shall now also speak accurately about
them.

4. Herod the Great had two daughters by Mariamne, the [grand] daughter
of Hyrcanus; the one was Salampsio, who was married to Phasaelus, her
first cousin, who was himself the son of Phasaelus, Herod's brother, her
father making the match; the other was Cypros, who was herself married
also to her first cousin Antipater, the son of Salome, Herod's sister.
Phasaelus had five children by Salampsio; Antipater, Herod, and
Alexander, and two daughters, Alexandra and Cypros; which last Agrippa,
the son of Aristobulus, married; and Timius of Cyprus married Alexandra;
he was a man of note, but had by her no children. Agrippa had by Cypros
two sons and three daughters, which daughters were named Bernice,
Mariamne, and Drusius; but the names of the sons were Agrippa and
Drusus, of which Drusus died before he came to the years of puberty; but
their father, Agrippa, was brought up with his other brethren, Herod and
Aristobulus, for these were also the sons of the son of Herod the Great
by Bernice; but Bernice was the daughter of Costobarus and of Salome,
who was Herod's sister. Aristobulus left these infants when he was slain
by his father, together with his brother Alexander, as we have already
related. But when they were arrived at years of puberty, this Herod, the
brother of Agrippa, married Mariamne, the daughter of Olympias, who was
the daughter of Herod the king, and of Joseph, the son of Joseph, who
was brother to Herod the king, and had by her a son, Aristobulus; but
Aristobulus, the third brother of Agrippa, married Jotape, the daughter
of Sampsigeramus, king of Emesa; they had a daughter who was deaf, whose
name also was Jotape; and these hitherto were the children of the male
line. But Herodias, their sister, was married to Herod [Philip], the son
of Herod the Great, who was born of Mariamne, the daughter of Simon the
high priest, who had a daughter, Salome; after whose birth Herodias took
upon her to confound the laws of our country, and divorced herself from
her husband while he was alive, and was married to Herod [Antipas], her
husband's brother by the father's side, he was tetrarch of Galilee; but
her daughter Salome was married to Philip, the son of Herod, and
tetrarch of Trachonitis; and as he died childless, Aristobulus, the son
of Herod, the brother of Agrippa, married her; they had three sons,
Herod, Agrippa, and Aristobulus; and this was the posterity of Phasaelus
and Salampsio. But the daughter of Antipater by Cypros was Cypros, whom
Alexas Selcias, the son of Alexas, married; they had a daughter, Cypros;
but Herod and Alexander, who, as we told you, were the brothers of
Antipater, died childless. As to Alexander, the son of Herod the king,
who was slain by his father, he had two sons, Alexander and Tigranes, by
the daughter of Archelaus, king of Cappadocia. Tigranes, who was king of
Armenia, was accused at Rome, and died childless; Alexander had a son of
the same name with his brother Tigranes, and was sent to take possession
of the kingdom of Armenia by Nero; he had a son, Alexander, who married
Jotape, 17 the daughter of Antiochus, the king of Commagena; Vespasian
made him king of an island in Cilicia. But these descendants of
Alexander, soon after their birth, deserted the Jewish religion, and
went over to that of the Greeks. But for the rest of the daughters of
Herod the king, it happened that they died childless. And as these
descendants of Herod, whom we have enumerated, were in being at the same
time that Agrippa the Great took the kingdom, and I have now given an
account of them, it now remains that I relate the several hard fortunes
which befell Agrippa, and how he got clear of them, and was advanced to
the greatest height of dignity and power.






CHAPTER 6. Of The Navigation Of King Agrippa To Rome, To Tiberius Cæsar;
And Now Upon His Being Accused By His Own Freed-Man, He Was Bound; How
Also He, Was Set At Liberty By Caius, After Tiberius's Death And Was
Made King Of The Tetrarchy Of Philip.

1. A Little before the death of Herod the king, Agrippa lived at Rome,
and was generally brought up and conversed with Drusus, the emperor
Tiberius's son, and contracted a friendship with Antonia, the wife of
Drusus the Great, who had his mother Bernice in great esteem, and was
very desirous of advancing her son. Now as Agrippa was by nature
magnanimous and generous in the presents he made, while his mother was
alive, this inclination of his mind did not appear, that he might be
able to avoid her anger for such his extravagance; but when Bernice was
dead, and he was left to his own conduct, he spent a great deal
extravagantly in his daily way of living, and a great deal in the
immoderate presents he made, and those chiefly among Cæsar's freed-men,
in order to gain their assistance, insomuch that he was, in a little
time, reduced to poverty, and could not live at Rome any longer.
Tiberius also forbade the friends of his deceased son to come into his
sight, because on seeing them he should be put in mind of his son, and
his grief would thereby be revived.

2. For these reasons he went away from Rome, and sailed to Judea, but in
evil circumstances, being dejected with the loss of that money which he
once had, and because he had not wherewithal to pay his creditors, who
were many in number, and such as gave him no room for escaping them.
Whereupon he knew not what to do; so, for shame of his present
condition, he retired to a certain tower, at Malatha, in Idumea, and had
thoughts of killing himself; but his wife Cypros perceived his
intentions, and tried all sorts of methods to divert him from his taking
such a course; so she sent a letter to his sister Herodias, who was now
the wife of Herod the tetrarch, and let her know Agrippa's present
design, and what necessity it was which drove him thereto, and desired
her, as a kinswoman of his, to give him her help, and to engage her
husband to do the same, since she saw how she alleviated these her
husband's troubles all she could, although she had not the like wealth
to do it withal. So they sent for him, and allotted him Tiberias for his
habitation, and appointed him some income of money for his maintenance,
and made him a magistrate of that city, by way of honor to him. Yet did
not Herod long continue in that resolution of supporting him, though
even that support was not sufficient for him; for as once they were at a
feast at Tyre, and in their cups, and reproaches were cast upon one
another, Agrippa thought that was not to be borne, while Herod hit him
in the teeth with his poverty, and with his owing his necessary food to
him. So he went to Flaccus, one that had been consul, and had been a
very great friend to him at Rome formerly, and was now president of
Syria.

3. Hereupon Flaccus received him kindly, and he lived with him. Flaccus
had also with him there Aristobulus, who was indeed Agrippa's brother,
but was at variance with him; yet did not their enmity to one another
hinder the friendship of Flaccus to them both, but still they were
honorably treated by him. However, Aristobulus did not abate of his ill-
will to Agrippa, till at length he brought him into ill terms with
Flaccus; the occasion of bringing on which estrangement was this: The
Damascens were at difference with the Sidonians about their limits, and
when Flaccus was about to hear the cause between them, they understood
that Agrippa had a mighty influence upon him; so they desired that he
would be of their side, and for that favor promised him a great deal of
money; so he was zealous in assisting the Damascens as far as he was
able. Now Aristobulus had gotten intelligence of this promise of money
to him, and accused him to Flaccus of the same; and when, upon a
thorough examination of the matter, it appeared plainly so to be, he
rejected Agrippa out of the number of his friends. So he was reduced to
the utmost necessity, and came to Ptolemais; and because he knew not
where else to get a livelihood, he thought to sail to Italy; but as he
was restrained from so doing by want of money, he desired Marsyas, who
was his freed-man, to find some method for procuring him so much as he
wanted for that purpose, by borrowing such a sum of some person or
other. So Marsyas desired of Peter, who was the freed-man of Bernice,
Agrippa's mother, and by the right of her testament was bequeathed to
Antonia, to lend so much upon Agrippa's own bond and security; but he
accused Agrippa of having defrauded him of certain sums of money, and so
obliged Marsyas, when he made the bond of twenty thousand Attic
drachmae, to accept of twenty-five hundred drachma as 18 less than what
he desired, which the other allowed of, because he could not help it.
Upon the receipt of this money, Agrippa came to Anthedon, and took
shipping, and was going to set sail; but Herennius Capito, who was the
procurator of Jamhis, sent a band of soldiers to demand of him three
hundred thousand drachmae of silver, which were by him owing to Cæsar's
treasury while he was at Rome, and so forced him to stay. He then
pretended that he would do as he bid him; but when night came on, he cut
his cables, and went off, and sailed to Alexandria, where he desired
Alexander the alabarch 19 to lend him two hundred thousand drachmae; but
he said he would not lend it to him, but would not refuse it to Cypros,
as greatly astonished at her affection to her husband, and at the other
instances of her virtue; so she undertook to repay it. Accordingly,
Alexander paid them five talents at Alexandria, and promised to pay them
the rest of that sum at Dicearchia [Puteoli]; and this he did out of the
fear he was in that Agrippa would soon spend it. So this Cypros set her
husband free, and dismissed him to go on with his navigation to Italy,
while she and her children departed for Judea.

4. And now Agrippa was come to Puteoli, whence he wrote a letter to
Tiberius Cæsar, who then lived at Capreae, and told him that he was come
so far in order to wait on him, and to pay him a visit; and desired that
he would give him leave to come over to Caprein: so Tiberius made no
difficulty, but wrote to him in an obliging way in other respects; and
withal told him he was glad of his safe return, and desired him to come
to Capreae; and when he was come, he did not fail to treat him as kindly
as he had promised him in his letter to do. But the next day came a
letter to Cæsar from Herennius Capito, to inform him that Agrippa had
borrowed three hundred thousand drachmae, and not pad it at the time
appointed; but when it was demanded of him, he ran away like a fugitive,
out of the places under his government, and put it out of his power to
get the money of him. When Cæsar had read this letter, he was much
troubled at it, and gave order that Agrippa should be excluded from his
presence until he had paid that debt: upon which he was no way daunted
at Cæsar's anger, but entreated Antonia, the mother of Germanicus, and
of Claudius, who was afterward Cæsar himself, to lend him those three
hundred thousand drachmae, that he might not be deprived of Tiberius's
friendship; so, out of regard to the memory of Bernice his mother, [for
those two women were very familiar with one another,] and out of regard
to his and Claudius's education together, she lent him the money; and,
upon the payment of this debt, there was nothing to hinder Tiberius's
friendship to him. After this, Tiberius Cæsar recommended to him his
grandson, 20 and ordered that he should always accompany him when he
went abroad. But upon Agrippa's kind reception by Antonia, he betook him
to pay his respects to Caius, who was her grandson, and in very high
reputation by reason of the good-will they bare his father. Now there
was one Thallus, a freed-man of Cæsar, of whom he borrowed a million of
drachmae, and thence repaid Antonia the debt he owed her; and by sending
the overplus in paying his court to Caius, became a person of great
authority with him.

5. Now as the friendship which Agrippa had for Caius was come to a great
height, there happened some words to pass between them, as they once
were in a chariot together, concerning Tiberius; Agrippa praying [to
God] [for they two sat by themselves] that Tiberius might soon go off
the stage, and leave the government to Caius, who was in every respect
more worthy of it. Now Eutychus, who was Agrippa's freed-man, and drove
his chariot, heard these words, and at that time said nothing of them;
but when Agrippa accused him of stealing some garments of his, [which
was certainly true,] he ran away from him; but when he was caught, and
brought before Piso, who was governor of the city, and the man was asked
why he ran away, he replied, that he had somewhat to say to Cæsar, that
tended to his security and preservation: so Piso bound him, and sent him
to Capreae. But Tiberius, according to his usual custom, kept him still
in bonds, being a delayer of affairs, if ever there was any other king
or tyrant that was so; for he did not admit ambassadors quickly, and no
successors were despatched away to governors or procurators of the
provinces that had been formerly sent, unless they were dead; whence it
was that he was so negligent in hearing the causes of prisoners;
insomuch that when he was asked by his friends what was the reason of
his delay in such cases, he said that he delayed to hear ambassadors,
lest, upon their quick dismission, other ambassadors should be
appointed, and return upon him; and so he should bring trouble upon
himself in their public reception and dismission: that he permitted
those governors who had been sent once to their government [to stay
there a long while], out of regard to the subjects that were under them;
for that all governors are naturally disposed to get as much as they
can; and that those who are not to fix there, but to stay a short time,
and that at an uncertainty when they shall be turned out, do the more
severely hurry themselves on to fleece the people; but that if their
government be long continued to them; they are at last satiated with the
spoils, as having gotten a vast deal, and so become at length less sharp
in their pillaging; but that if successors are sent quickly, the poor
subjects, who are exposed to them as a prey, will not be able to bear
the new ones, while they shall not have the same time allowed them
wherein their predecessors had filled themselves, and so grew more
unconcerned about getting more; and this because they are removed before
they have had time [for their oppressions]. He gave them an example to
show his meaning: A great number of flies came about the sore places of
a man that had been wounded; upon which one of the standers-by pitied
the man's misfortune, and thinking he was not able to drive those flies
away himself, was going to drive them away for him; but he prayed him to
let them alone: the other, by way of reply, asked him the reason of such
a preposterous proceeding, in preventing relief from his present misery;
to which he answered, "If thou drivest these flies away, thou wilt hurt
me worse; for as these are already full of my blood, they do not crowd
about me, nor pain me so much as before, but are somewhat more remiss,
while the fresh ones that come almost famished, and find me quite tired
down already, will be my destruction. For this cause, therefore, it is
that I am myself careful not to send such new governors perpetually to
those my subjects, who are already sufficiently harassed by many
oppressions, as may, like these flies, further distress them; and so,
besides their natural desire of gain, may have this additional
incitement to it, that they expect to be suddenly deprived of that
pleasure which they take in it." And, as a further attestation to what I
say of the dilatory nature of Tiberius, I appeal to this his practice
itself; for although he was emperor twenty-two years, he sent in all but
two procurators to govern the nation of the Jews, Gratus, and his
successor in the government, Pilate. Nor was he in one way of acting
with respect to the Jews, and in another with respect to the rest of his
subjects. He further informed them, that even in the hearing of the
causes of prisoners, he made such delays, because immediate death to
those that must be condemned to die would be an alleviation of their
present miseries, while those wicked wretches have not deserved any such
favor; "but I do it, that, by being harassed with the present calamity,
they may undergo greater misery."

6. On this account it was that Eutychus could not obtain a bearing, but
was kept still in prison. However, some time afterward, Tiberius came
from Capreae to Tusculanum, which is about a hundred furlongs from Rome.
Agrippa then desired of Antonia that she would procure a hearing for
Eutychus, let the matter whereof he accused him prove what it would. Now
Antonia was greatly esteemed by Tiberius on all accounts, from the
dignity of her relation to him, who had been his brother Drusus's wife,
and from her eminent chastity; 21 for though she was still a young
woman, she continued in her widowhood, and refused all other matches,
although Augustus had enjoined her to be married to somebody else; yet
did she all along preserve her reputation free from reproach. She had
also been the greatest benefactress to Tiberius, when there was a very
dangerous plot laid against him by Sejanus, a man who had been her
husband's friend, and who had the greatest authority, because he was
general of the army, and when many members of the senate and many of the
freed-men joined with him, and the soldiery was corrupted, and the plot
was come to a great height. Now Sejanus had certainly gained his point,
had not Antonia's boldness been more wisely conducted than Sejanus's
malice; for when she had discovered his designs against Tiberius, she
wrote him an exact account of the whole, and gave the letter to Pallas,
the most faithful of her servants, and sent him to Caprere to Tiberius,
who, when he understood it, slew Sejanus and his confederates; so that
Tiberius, who had her in great esteem before, now looked upon her with
still greater respect, and depended upon her in all things. So when
Tiberius was desired by this Antonia to examine Eutychus, he answered,
"If indeed Eutychus hath falsely accused Agrippa in what he hath said of
him, he hath had sufficient punishment by what I have done to him
already; but if, upon examination, the accusation appears to be true,
let Agrippa have a care, lest, out of desire of punishing his freed-man,
he do not rather bring a punishment upon himself." Now when Antonia told
Agrippa of this, he was still much more pressing that the matter might
be examined into; so Antonia, upon Agrippa's lying hard at her
continually to beg this favor, took the following opportunity: As
Tiberius lay once at his ease upon his sedan, and was carried about, and
Caius, her grandson, and Agrippa, were before him after dinner she
walked by the sedan, and desired him to call Eutychus, and have him
examined; to which he replied, "O Antonia! the gods are my witnesses
that I am induced to do what I am going to do, not by my own
inclination, but because I am forced to it by thy prayers." When he had
said this, he ordered Macro, who succeeded Sejanus, to bring Eutychus to
him; accordingly, without any delay, he was brought. Then Tiberius asked
him what he had to say against a man who had given him his liberty. Upon
which he said, "O my lord! this Caius, and Agrippa with him, were once
riding in a chariot, when I sat at their feet, and, among other
discourses that passed, Agrippa said to Caius, Oh that the day would
once come when this old fellow will die and name thee for the governor
of the habitable earth! for then this Tiberius, his grandson, would be
no hinderance, but would be taken off by thee, and that earth would be
happy, and I happy also." Now Tiberius took these to be truly Agrippa's
words, and bearing a grudge withal at Agrippa, because, when he had
commanded him to pay his respects to Tiberius, his grandson, and the son
of Drusus, Agrippa had not paid him that respect, but had disobeyed his
commands, and transferred all his regard to Caius; he said to Macro,
"Bind this man." But Macro, not distinctly knowing which of them it was
whom he bid him bind, and not expecting that he would have any such
thing done to Agrippa, he forbore, and came to ask more distinctly what
it was that he said. But when Cæsar had gone round the hippodrome, he
found Agrippa standing: "For certain," said he, "Macro, this is the man
I meant to have bound;" and when he still asked, "Which of these is to
be bound?" he said "Agrippa." Upon which Agrippa betook himself to make
supplication for himself, putting him in mind of his son, with whom he
was brought up, and of Tiberius [his grandson] whom he had educated; but
all to no purpose; for they led him about bound even in his purple
garments. It was also very hot weather, and they had but little wine to
their meal, so that he was very thirsty; he was also in a sort of agony,
and took this treatment of him heinously: as he therefore saw one of
Caius's slaves, whose name was Thaumastus, carrying some water in a
vessel, he desired that he would let him drink; so the servant gave him
some water to drink, and he drank heartily, and said, "O thou boy! this
service of thine to me will be for thy advantage; for if I once get
clear of these my bonds, I will soon procure thee thy freedom of Caius
who has not been wanting to minister to me now I am in bonds, in the
same manner as when I was in my former state and dignity." Nor did he
deceive him in what he promised him, but made him amends for what he had
now done; for when afterward Agrippa was come to the kingdom, he took
particular care of Thaumastus, and got him his liberty from Caius, and
made him the steward over his own estate; and when he died, he left him
to Agrippa his son, and to Bernice his daughter, to minister to them in
the same capacity. The man also grew old in that honorable post, and
therein died. But all this happened a good while later.

7. Now Agrippa stood in his bonds before the royal palace, and leaned on
a certain tree for grief, with many others, who were in bonds also; and
as a certain bird sat upon the tree on which Agrippa leaned, [the Romans
call this bird bubo,] [an owl,] one of those that were bound, a German
by nation, saw him, and asked a soldier who that man in purple was; and
when he was informed that his name was Agrippa, and that he was by
nation a Jew, and one of the principal men of that nation, he asked
leave of the soldier to whom he was bound, 22 to let him come nearer to
him, to speak with him; for that he had a mind to inquire of him about
some things relating to his country; which liberty, when he had
obtained, and as he stood near him, he said thus to him by an
interpreter: "This sudden change of thy condition, O young man! is
grievous to thee, as bringing on thee a manifold and very great
adversity; nor wilt thou believe me, when I foretell how thou wilt get
clear of this misery which thou art now under, and how Divine Providence
will provide for thee. Know therefore [and I appeal to my own country
gods, as well as to the gods of this place, who have awarded these bonds
to us] that all I am going to say about thy concerns shall neither be
said for favor nor bribery, nor out of an endeavor to make thee cheerful
without cause; for such predictions, when they come to fail, make the
grief at last, and in earnest, more bitter than if the party had never
heard of any such thing. However, though I run the hazard of my own
self, I think it fit to declare to thee the prediction of the gods. It
cannot be that thou shouldst long continue in these bonds; but thou wilt
soon be delivered from them, and wilt be promoted to the highest dignity
and power, and thou wilt be envied by all those who now pity thy hard
fortune; and thou wilt be happy till thy death, and wilt leave thine
happiness to the children whom thou shalt have. But do thou remember,
when thou seest this bird again, that thou wilt then live but five days
longer. This event will be brought to pass by that God who hath sent
this bird hither to be a sign unto thee. And I cannot but think it
unjust to conceal from thee what I foreknow concerning thee, that, by
thy knowing beforehand what happiness is coming upon thee, thou mayst
not regard thy present misfortunes. But when this happiness shall
actually befall thee, do not forget what misery I am in myself, but
endeavor to deliver me." So when the German had said this, he made
Agrippa laugh at him as much as he afterwards appeared worthy of
admiration. But now Antonia took Agrippa's misfortune to heart: however,
to speak to Tiberius on his behalf, she took to be a very difficult
thing, and indeed quite impracticable, as to any hope of success; yet
did she procure of Macro, that the soldiers that kept him should be of a
gentle nature, and that the centurion who was over them and was to diet
with him, should be of the same disposition, and that he might have
leave to bathe himself every day, and that his freed-men and friends
might come to him, and that other things that tended to ease him might
be indulged him. So his friend Silas came in to him, and two of his
freed-men, Marsyas and Stechus, brought him such sorts of food as he was
fond of, and indeed took great care of him; they also brought him
garments, under pretense of selling them; and when night came on, they
laid them under him; and the soldiers assisted them, as Macro had given
them order to do beforehand. And this was Agrippa's condition for six
months' time, and in this case were his affairs.

8. But for Tiberius, upon his return to Caprein, he fell sick. At first
his distemper was but gentle; but as that distemper increased upon him,
he had small or no hopes of recovery. Hereupon he bid Euodus, who was
that freed-man whom he most of all respected, to bring the children 23
to him, for that he wanted to talk to them before he died. Now he had at
present no sons of his own alive for Drusus, who was his only son, was
dead; but Drusus's son Tiberius was still living, whose additional name
was Gemellus: there was also living Caius, the son of Germanicus, who
was the son 24 of his brother [Drusus]. He was now grown up, and had a
liberal education, and was well improved by it, and was in esteem and
favor with the people, on account of the excellent character of his
father Germanicus, who had attained the highest honor among the
multitude, by the firmness of his virtuous behavior, by the easiness and
agreeableness of his conversing with the multitude, and because the
dignity he was in did not hinder his familiarity with them all, as if
they were his equals; by which behavior he was not only greatly esteemed
by the people and the senate, but by every one of those nations that
were subject to the Romans; some of which were affected when they came
to him with the gracefulness of their reception by him, and others were
affected in the same manner by the report of the others that had been
with him; and, upon his death, there was a lamentation made by all men;
not such a one as was to be made in way of flattery to their rulers,
while they did but counterfeit sorrow, but such as was real; while every
body grieved at his death, as if they had lost one that was near to
them. And truly such had been his easy conversation with men, that it
turned greatly to the advantage of his son among all; and, among others,
the soldiery were so peculiarly affected to him, that they reckoned it
an eligible thing, if need were, to die themselves, if he might but
attain to the government.

9. But when Tiberius had given order to Euodus to bring the children to
him the next day in the morning, he prayed to his country gods to show
him a manifest signal which of those children should come to the
government; being very desirous to leave it to his son's son, but still
depending upon what God should foreshow concerning them more than upon
his own opinion and inclination; so he made this to be the omen, that
the government should be left to him who should come to him first the
next day. When he had thus resolved within himself, he sent to his
grandson's tutor, and ordered him to bring the child to him early in the
morning, as supposing that God would permit him to be made emperor. But
God proved opposite to his designation; for while Tiberius was thus
contriving matters, and as soon as it was at all day, he bid Euodus to
call in that child which should be there ready. So he went out, and
found Caius before the door, for Tiberius was not yet come, but staid
waiting for his breakfast; for Euodus knew nothing of what his lord
intended; so he said to Caius, "Thy father calls thee," and then brought
him in. As soon as Tiberius saw Caius, and not before, he reflected on
the power of God, and how the ability of bestowing the government on
whom he would was entirely taken from him; and thence he was not able to
establish what he had intended. So he greatly lamented that his power of
establishing what he had before contrived was taken from him, and that
his grandson Tiberius was not only to lose the Roman empire by his
fatality, but his own safety also, because his preservation would now
depend upon such as would be more potent than himself, who would think
it a thing not to be borne, that a kinsman should live with them, and so
his relation would not be able to protect him; but he would be feared
and hated by him who had the supreme authority, partly on account of his
being next to the empire, and partly on account of his perpetually
contriving to get the government, both in order to preserve himself, and
to be at the head of affairs also. Now Tiberius had been very much given
to astrology, 25 and the calculation of nativities, and had spent his
life in the esteem of what predictions had proved true, more than those
whose profession it was. Accordingly, when he once saw Galba coming in
to him, he said to his most intimate friends, that there came in a man
that would one day have the dignity of the Roman empire. So that this
Tiberius was more addicted to all such sorts of diviners than any other
of the Roman emperors, because he had found them to have told him truth
in his own affairs. And indeed he was now in great distress upon this
accident that had befallen him, and was very much grieved at the
destruction of his son's son, which he foresaw, and complained of
himself, that he should have made use of such a method of divination
beforehand, while it was in his power to have died without grief by this
knowledge of futurity; whereas he was now tormented by his foreknowledge
of the misfortune of such as were dearest to him, and must die under
that torment. Now although he was disordered at this unexpected
revolution of the government to those for whom he did not intend it, he
spake thus to Caius, though unwillingly, and against his own
inclination: "O child! although Tiberius be nearer related to me than
thou art, I, by my own determination, and the conspiring suffrage of the
gods, do give and put into thy hand the Roman empire; and I desire thee
never to be unmindful when thou comest to it, either of my kindness to
thee, who set thee in so high a dignity, or of thy relation to Tiberius.
But as thou knowest that I am, together with and after the gods, the
procurer of so great happiness to thee; so I desire that thou wilt make
me a return for my readiness to assist thee, and wilt take care of
Tiberius because of his near relation to thee. Besides which, thou art
to know, that while Tiberius is alive, he will be a security to thee,
both as to empire and as to thy own preservation; but if he die, that
will be but a prelude to thy own misfortunes; for to be alone under the
weight of such vast affairs is very dangerous; nor will the gods suffer
those actions which are unjustly done, contrary to that law which
directs men to act otherwise, to go off unpunished." This was the speech
which Tiberius made, which did not persuade Caius to act accordingly,
although he promised so to do; but when he was settled in the
government, he took off this Tiberius, as was predicted by the other
Tiberius; as he was also himself, in no long time afterward, slain by a
secret plot laid against him.

10. So when Tiberius had at this time appointed Caius to be his
successor, he outlived but a few days, and then died, after he had held
the government twenty-two years five months and three days. Now Caius
was the fourth emperor. But when the Romans understood that Tiberius was
dead, they rejoiced at the good news, but had not courage to believe it;
not because they were unwilling it should be true, for they would have
given huge sums of money that it might be so, but because they were
afraid, that if they had showed their joy when the news proved false,
their joy should be openly known, and they should be accused for it, and
be thereby undone. For this Tiberius had brought a vast number of
miseries on the best families of the Romans, since he was easily
inflamed with passion in all cases, and was of such a temper as rendered
his anger irrevocable, till he had executed the same, although he had
taken a hatred against men without reason; for he was by nature fierce
in all the sentences he gave, and made death the penalty for the
lightest offenses; insomuch that when the Romans heard the rumor about
his death gladly, they were restrained from the enjoyment of that
pleasure by the dread of such miseries as they foresaw would follow, if
their hopes proved ill-grounded. Now Marsyas, Agrippa's freed-man, as
soon as he heard of Tiberius's death, came running to tell Agrippa the
news; and finding him going out to the bath, he gave him a nod, and
said, in the Hebrew tongue, "The lion 26 is dead;" who, understanding
his meaning, and being overjoyed at the news, "Nay," said he, "but all
sorts of thanks and happiness attend thee for this news of thine; only I
wish that what thou sayest may prove true." Now the centurion who was
set to keep Agrippa, when he saw with what haste Marsyas came, and what
joy Agrippa had from what he said, he had a suspicion that his words
implied some great innovation of affairs, and he asked them about what
was said. They at first diverted the discourse; but upon his further
pressing, Agrippa, without more ado, told him, for he was already become
his friend; so he joined with him in that pleasure which this news
occasioned, because it would be fortunate to Agrippa, and made him a
supper. But as they were feasting, and the cups went about, there came
one who said that Tiberius was still alive, and would return to the city
in a few days. At which news the centurion was exceedingly troubled,
because he had done what might cost him his life, to have treated so
joyfully a prisoner, and this upon the news of the death of Cæsar; so he
thrust Agrippa from the couch whereon he lay, and said, "Dost thou think
to cheat me by a lie about the emperor without punishment? and shalt not
thou pay for this thy malicious report at the price of thine head?" When
he had so said, he ordered Agrippa to be bound again, [for he had loosed
him before,] and kept a severer guard over him than formerly, and in
that evil condition was Agrippa that night; but the next day the rumor
increased in the city, and confirmed the news that Tiberius was
certainly dead; insomuch that men durst now openly and freely talk about
it; nay, some offered sacrifices on that account. Several letters also
came from Caius; one of them to the senate, which informed them of the
death of Tiberius, and of his own entrance on the government; another to
Piso, the governor of the city, which told him the same thing. He also
gave order that Agrippa should be removed out of the camp, and go to
that house where he lived before he was put in prison; so that he was
now out of fear as to his own affairs; for although he was still in
custody, yet it was now with ease to his own affairs. Now, as soon as
Caius was come to Rome, and had brought Tiberius's dead body with him,
and had made a sumptuous funeral for him, according to the laws of his
country, he was much disposed to set Agrippa at liberty that very day;
but Antonia hindered him, not out of any ill-will to the prisoner, but
out of regard to decency in Caius, lest that should make men believe
that he received the death of Tiberius with pleasure, when he loosed one
whom he had bound immediately. However, there did not many days pass ere
he sent for him to his house, and had him shaved, and made him change
his raiment; after which he put a diadem upon his head, and appointed
him to be king of the tetrarchy of Philip. He also gave him the
tetrarchy of Lysanias, 27 and changed his iron chain for a golden one of
equal weight. He also sent Marullus to be procurator of Judea.

11. Now, in the second year of the reign of Caius Cæsar, Agrippa desired
leave to be given him to sail home, and settle the affairs of his
government; and he promised to return again, when he had put the rest in
order, as it ought to be put. So, upon the emperor's permission, he came
into his own country, and appeared to them all unexpectedly as asking,
and thereby demonstrated to the men that saw him the power of fortune,
when they compared his former poverty with his present happy affluence;
so some called him a happy man, and others could not well believe that
things were so much changed with him for the better.






CHAPTER 7. How Herod The Tetrarch Was Banished.

1. But Herodias, Agrippa's sister, who now lived as wife to that Herod
who was tetrarch of Galilee and Peres, took this authority of her
brother in an envious manner, particularly when she saw that he had a
greater dignity bestowed on him than her husband had; since, when he ran
away, it was because he was not able to pay his debts; and now he was
come back, he was in a way of dignity, and of great good fortune. She
was therefore grieved and much displeased at so great a mutation of his
affairs; and chiefly when she saw him marching among the multitude with
the usual ensigns of royal authority, she was not able to conceal how
miserable she was, by reason of the envy she had towards him; but she
excited her husband, and desired him that he would sail to Rome, to
court honors equal to his; for she said that she could not bear to live
any longer, while Agrippa, the son of that Aristobulus who was condemned
to die by his father, one that came to her husband in such extreme
poverty, that the necessaries of life were forced to be entirely
supplied him day by day; and when he fled away from his creditors by
sea, he now returned a king; while he was himself the son of a king, and
while the near relation he bare to royal authority called upon him to
gain the like dignity, he sat still, and was contented with a privater
life. "But then, Herod, although thou wast formerly not concerned to be
in a lower condition than thy father from whom thou wast derived had
been, yet do thou now seek after the dignity which thy kinsman hath
attained to; and do not thou bear this contempt, that a man who admired
thy riches should be in greater honor than thyself, nor suffer his
poverty to show itself able to purchase greater things than our
abundance; nor do thou esteem it other than a shameful thing to be
inferior to one who, the other day, lived upon thy charity. But let us
go to Rome, and let us spare no pains nor expenses, either of silver or
gold, since they cannot be kept for any better use than for the
obtaining of a kingdom."

2. But for Herod, he opposed her request at this time, out of the love
of ease, and having a suspicion of the trouble he should have at Rome;
so he tried to instruct her better. But the more she saw him draw back,
the more she pressed him to it, and desired him to leave no stone
unturned in order to be king; and at last she left not off till she
engaged him, whether he would or not, to be of her sentiments, because
he could no otherwise avoid her importunity. So he got all things ready,
after as sumptuous a manner as he was able, and spared for nothing, and
went up to Rome, and took Herodias along with him. But Agrippa, when he
was made sensible of their intentions and preparations, he also prepared
to go thither; and as soon as he heard they set sail, he sent
Fortunatus, one of his freed-men, to Rome, to carry presents to the
emperor, and letters against Herod, and to give Caius a particular
account of those matters, if he should have any opportunity. This man
followed Herod so quick, and had so prosperous a voyage, and came so
little after Herod, that while Herod was with Caius, he came himself,
and delivered his letters; for they both sailed to Dicearchia, and found
Caius at Bairn, which is itself a little city of Campania, at the
distance of about five furlongs from Dicearchia. There are in that place
royal palaces, with sumptuous apartments, every emperor still
endeavoring to outdo his predecessor's magnificence; the place also
affords warm baths, that spring out of the ground of their own accord,
which are of advantage for the recovery of the health of those that make
use of them; and, besides, they minister to men's luxury also. Now Caius
saluted Herod, for he first met with him, and then looked upon the
letters which Agrippa had sent him, and which were written in order to
accuse Herod; wherein he accused him, that he had been in confederacy
with Sejanus against Tiberius's and that he was now confederate with
Artabanus, the king of Parthia, in opposition to the government of
Caius; as a demonstration of which he alleged, that he had armor
sufficient for seventy thousand men ready in his armory. Caius was moved
at this information, and asked Herod whether what was said about the
armor was true; and when he confessed there was such armor there, for he
could not deny the same, the truth of it being too notorious, Caius took
that to be a sufficient proof of the accusation, that he intended to
revolt. So he took away from him his tetrarchy, and gave it by way of
addition to Agrippa's kingdom; he also gave Herod's money to Agrippa,
and, by way of punishment, awarded him a perpetual banishment, and
appointed Lyons, a city of Gaul, to be his place of habitation. But when
he was informed that Herodias was Agrippa's sister, he made her a
present of what money was her own, and told her that it was her brother
who prevented her being put under the same calamity with her husband.
But she made this reply: "Thou, indeed, O emperor! actest after a
magnificent manner, and as becomes thyself in what thou offerest me; but
the kindness which I have for my husband hinders me from partaking of
the favor of thy gift; for it is not just that I, who have been made a
partner in his prosperity, should forsake him in his misfortunes."
Hereupon Caius was angry at her, and sent her with Herod into
banishment, and gave her estate to Agrippa. And thus did God punish
Herodias for her envy at her brother, and Herod also for giving ear to
the vain discourses of a woman. Now Caius managed public affairs with
great magnanimity during the first and second year of his reign, and
behaved himself with such moderation, that he gained the good-will of
the Romans themselves, and of his other subjects. But, in process of
time, he went beyond the bounds of human nature in his conceit of
himself, and by reason of the vastness of his dominions made himself a
god, and took upon himself to act in all things to the reproach of the
Deity itself.






CHAPTER 8. Concerning The Embassage Of The Jews To Caius; 28 And How
Caius Sent Petronius Into Syria To Make War Against The Jews, Unless
They Would Receive His Statue.

1. There was now a tumult arisen at Alexandria, between the Jewish
inhabitants and the Greeks; and three ambassadors were chosen out of
each party that were at variance, who came to Caius. Now one of these
ambassadors from the people of Alexandria was Apion, 29 who uttered many
blasphemies against the Jews; and, among other things that he said, he
charged them with neglecting the honors that belonged to Cæsar; for that
while all who were subject to the Roman empire built altars and temples
to Caius, and in other regards universally received him as they received
the gods, these Jews alone thought it a dishonorable thing for them to
erect statues in honor of him, as well as to swear by his name. Many of
these severe things were said by Apion, by which he hoped to provoke
Caius to anger at the Jews, as he was likely to be. But Philo, the
principal of the Jewish embassage, a man eminent on all accounts,
brother to Alexander the alabarch, 30 and one not unskillful in
philosophy, was ready to betake himself to make his defense against
those accusations; but Caius prohibited him, and bid him begone; he was
also in such a rage, that it openly appeared he was about to do them
some very great mischief. So Philo being thus affronted, went out, and
said to those Jews who were about him, that they should be of good
courage, since Caius's words indeed showed anger at them, but in reality
had already set God against himself.

2. Hereupon Caius, taking it very heinously that he should be thus
despised by the Jews alone, sent Petronius to be president of Syria, and
successor in the government to Vitellius, and gave him order to make an
invasion into Judea, with a great body of troops; and if they would
admit of his statue willingly, to erect it in the temple of God; but if
they were obstinate, to conquer them by war, and then to do it.
Accordingly, Petronius took the government of Syria, and made haste to
obey Cæsar's epistle. He got together as great a number of auxiliaries
as he possibly could, and took with him two legions of the Roman army,
and came to Ptolemais, and there wintered, as intending to set about the
war in the spring. He also wrote word to Caius what he had resolved to
do, who commended him for his alacrity, and ordered him to go on, and to
make war with them, in case they would not obey his commands. But there
came many ten thousands of the Jews to Petronius, to Ptolemais, to offer
their petitions to him, that he would not compel them to transgress and
violate the law of their forefathers; "but if," said they, "thou art
entirely resolved to bring this statue, and erect it, do thou first kill
us, and then do what thou hast resolved on; for while we are alive we
cannot permit such things as are forbidden us to be done by the
authority of our legislator, and by our forefathers' determination that
such prohibitions are instances of virtue." But Petronius was angry at
them, and said, "If indeed I were myself emperor, and were at liberty to
follow my own inclination, and then had designed to act thus, these your
words would be justly spoken to me; but now Cæsar hath sent to me, I am
under the necessity of being subservient to his decrees, because a
disobedience to them will bring upon me inevitable destruction." Then
the Jews replied, "Since, therefore, thou art so disposed, O Petronius!
that thou wilt not disobey Caius's epistles, neither will we transgress
the commands of our law; and as we depend upon the excellency of our
laws, and, by the labors of our ancestors, have continued hitherto
without suffering them to be transgressed, we dare not by any means
suffer ourselves to be so timorous as to transgress those laws out of
the fear of death, which God hath determined are for our advantage; and
if we fall into misfortunes, we will bear them, in order to preserve our
laws, as knowing that those who expose themselves to dangers have good
hope of escaping them, because God will stand on our side, when, out of
regard to him, we undergo afflictions, and sustain the uncertain turns
of fortune. But if we should submit to thee, we should be greatly
reproached for our cowardice, as thereby showing ourselves ready to
